Promotion of the `UseKRaft` feature gate (#100)
strimzi/proposals: 062-UseKRaft-feature-gate-promotion.md

    * Scale-up of dedicated controller nodes (the scale-up eventually succeeds, but the broker availability is not maintained)
  * This is currently blocked by the support for [KIP-853](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-853%3A+KRaft+Controller+Membership+Changes).
    This KIP might not be implemented earlier than in Apache Kafka 4.0.
    Support for scaling controllers is currently not seen as blocker for moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _GA_.
* JBOD support
  * Tracked in [strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator#9437](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9437)
  * Expected to be implemented in Apache Kafka 3.7.0.
    The Strimzi implementation fill follow the release of Kafka 3.7.0 in Strimzi 0.40 or 0.41.

## Proposed timeline

This proposal proposes the following timeline for the graduation of the `UseKRaft` feature gate:
* Move to _beta_ phase and be enabled by default in Strimzi 0.40.0
* Move to _GA_ phase and be permanently enabled in Strimzi 0.42.0

It is worth noting that:
* In addition to the `UseKRaft` feature gate, the KRaft clusters are enabled / disabled using the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation.

>   As a result, moving the `UseKRaft`` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ does not mean that all new Kafka clusters have to use KRaft or that this has any impact on existing ZooKeeper based clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  As a result, moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ does not mean that all new Kafka clusters have to use KRaft or that this has any impact on existing ZooKeeper based clusters.
```

  KRaft will be applied only to the Kafka clusters with the right annotation.
* Moving the `UseKRaft` feature to beta or GA does not mean we will drop support for ZooKeeper-based clusters.

>   While moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _GA_ defines the earliest moment when support for ZooKeeper based clusters can be dropped, it is currently not expected to happen in Strimzi 0.42 and this proposal does not establish any such plan.

Reviewer: This is in contradiction with the previous phrase, as you say it's not expected, which means it is unlikely but can happen.

I think we want to have both KRaft and ZK supported as GA in at least one release. There are a lot of users that would not consider the migration until KRaft support is declared GA in Strimzi. If we want to support that, the earliest moment to drop ZK (and migration) would be 0.43. This is also not expected to happen IMO, as we will probably have multiple releases with both ZK and KRaft modes supported as GA.

Author: Where is it a contradiction? It says that `UseKRaft` being GA is only one of the prerequisites of ZooKeeper support being removed, that ZooKeeper support removal is currently not expected to happen in 0.42 and that no timeline for it is established by this PR. None of that contradicts each other.

Reviewer: not expected != won't happen, I think we should be clear about that

Author: That is correct and as the second part of the sentence explains, that is not for this proposal to guarantee or define one way or another in any way. For that to happen, there would be another proposal.

Reviewer: > not for this proposal to guarantee or define one way or another

exactly, but this is not what line 42 says

Author: How is it not in line? They are fully in sync from my perspective.

Reviewer: My problem is with the words "not expected", which IMO do not exclude the possibility of another proposal dropping support for ZK when KRaft becomes GA. 

Can't we simply say that ZK support will be dropped at some point in time *after* KRaft will be declared GA in Strimzi? I think that would be much clearer.

Reviewer: With "right after" is ok for me. Thanks.

## Proposed changes

Apart from the change to the feature gate status itself, this proposal also includes several other changes.

### CRD changes

KRaft is usable only with the use of `KafkaNodePool` custom resources that configure the number of replicas and storage configuration.
As part of promoting the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ stage, we will make the following fields in the `Kafka` custom resource optional instead of required:
* `.spec.kafka.replicas`
* `.spec.kafka.storage`

In addition, the KRaft clusters do not need the ZooKeeper configuration.
So the `.spec.zookeeper` section will be made optional as well.

For ZooKeeper clusters, the validation of these fields will be done inside the Strimzi operator.
Additionally, CEL validation rules will be considered as they might allow us to do additional validation on the Kubernetes level.

For Kafka clusters using the node pools, a warning will be raised by the operator when the ignored `.spec.kafka.replicas` and `.spec.kafka.storage` fields are used.
For KRaft based clusters, a warning will be raised when `.spec.zookeeper` section is used.

### Safety check for existing clusters

> For existing clusters, a safety check will be implemented to prevent users from switching existing ZooKeeper-based clusters to Kraft-based cluster (or vice-versa) by mistake.

Reviewer 2: What kind of a safety check? Can you elaborate a little bit more please?

Author: I expanded this a bit to better explain what the check is. Essentially, the check should compare the desired metadata state (basically the KRaft annotation) with the actual metadata state (`.status.metadataState`) and if they do not match, it should reject it as the only way to transition between Zoo and KRaft should be the migration and we do not want to break ay cluster just because someone adds a wrong annotation to it.

Reviewer 2: But this field doesn't not exist yet and it's part of my migration work (it's also called `kafkaMetadataState` as we agreed to call it after having `kafkaMetadataVersion` as well). If you need this field now for this proposal, I would like to try to get it from my PR also having the `KafkaMetadataStateManager` handling it in order to avoid to have a totally different way now and then my code for the migration. It would avoid a lot of conflicts for me maybe breaking everything else or anyway rewriting part of the code from scratch.

Author: > But this field doesn't not exist yet and it's part of my migration work (it's also called kafkaMetadataState as we agreed to call it after having kafkaMetadataVersion as well).

The migration proposal talks about `.status.metadataState`. I will update it at least in this proposal to use `kafkaMetadataState` then.

>If you need this field now for this proposal, I would like to try to get it from my PR also having the KafkaMetadataStateManager handling it in order to avoid to have a totally different way now and then my code for the migration. It would avoid a lot of conflicts for me maybe breaking everything else or anyway rewriting part of the code from scratch.

As this proposal says - I expect this to be either delivered by the migration proposal or separately. If you want, you can separate this from your Pr and we can look into it earlier. I think I already suggested it in the past. But I do not think this really needs to be covered in the proposal itself.

Reviewer 2: > The migration proposal talks about .status.metadataState. I will update it at least in this proposal to use kafkaMetadataState then.

Yeah. There is a lot I should update on that proposal at some point (even the FSM is changed). We agreed to move from `metadataState` to 'kafkaMetadataState` when you introduced the `kafkaMetadataVersion` which was better than just `metadataVersion`.

> As this proposal says - I expect this to be either delivered by the migration proposal or separately. If you want, you can separate this from your Pr and we can look into it earlier. I think I already suggested it in the past. But I do not think this really needs to be covered in the proposal itself.

Yeah I know you suggested it in the past, but I thought about it like a way to breakdown the migration work while now it seems already useful (or needed?) to the `useKRaft` promotion proposal.

Author: Well, strictly speaking I think the current plan is to still deliver the migration in 0.40. So it might not be needed even without a separate PR. (but I'm fine if you want to do it earlier rather than wait of course)

Reviewer 2: Well this is my concern, plans are done to be screwed up :-)

> This flag will used the `.status.metadataState` field in the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer 2: `This flag` ... which flag?

Author: There is no flag, I reworded this.

# Promotion of the `UseKRaft` feature gate

The `UseKRaft` feature gate allows users and developers of the Strimzi operator to deploy and manage a KRaft-based Kafka cluster.
It was originally introduced in May 2022 in the [Strimzi Proposal #36 - KRaft support: ZooKeeper-less Kafka](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/blob/main/036-kraft-mode.md).

> When it was introduced, there were still a significant limitations to the KRaft mode both in Apache Kafka as well as in Strimzi.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When introduced, KRaft mode in both Apache Kafka and Strimzi had significant limitations.
```

> Therefore it did not introduced any timeline for the graduation of the feature gate and till today it is in the _alpha_ stage and disabled by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consequently, no specific timeline was established for the graduation of the feature gate. Currently, the feature gate remains in the _alpha_ stage and is disabled by default.
```

    But missing support for migration does not affect any users who would want to deploy and run new clusters in KRaft mode.
  * This is currently expected to be implemented in Strimzi 0.40 or 0.41.
* Scaling of KRaft controller nodes
  * Tracked in [strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator#9429](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9429)
  * Currently not supported are:
    * Scale-down of dedicated or mixed controller nodes that breaches the controller quorum
    * Scale-up of dedicated controller nodes (the scale-up eventually succeeds, but the broker availability is not maintained)
  * This is currently blocked by the support for [KIP-853](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-853%3A+KRaft+Controller+Membership+Changes).
    This KIP might not be implemented earlier than in Apache Kafka 4.0.
    Support for scaling controllers is currently not seen as blocker for moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _GA_.
* JBOD support
  * Tracked in [strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator#9437](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9437)
  * Expected to be implemented in Apache Kafka 3.7.0.

>     The Strimzi implementation fill follow the release of Kafka 3.7.0 in Strimzi 0.40 or 0.41.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The Strimzi implementation will follow the release of Kafka 3.7.0 in Strimzi 0.40 or 0.41.
```

## Proposed timeline

> This proposal proposes the following timeline for the graduation of the `UseKRaft` feature gate:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This proposal outlines the following timeline for the graduation of the `UseKRaft` feature gate:
```

* Move to _beta_ phase and be enabled by default in Strimzi 0.40.0
* Move to _GA_ phase and be permanently enabled in Strimzi 0.42.0

It is worth noting that:
* In addition to the `UseKRaft` feature gate, the KRaft clusters are enabled / disabled using the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation.

>   As a result, moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ does not mean that all new Kafka clusters have to use KRaft or that this has any impact on existing ZooKeeper based clusters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  As a result, moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ does not mean that all new Kafka clusters have to use KRaft or that this has any impact on existing ZooKeeper-based clusters.
```

  KRaft will be applied only to the Kafka clusters with the right annotation.
* Moving the `UseKRaft` feature to beta or GA does not mean we will drop support for ZooKeeper-based clusters.
  While moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _GA_ defines the earliest moment when support for ZooKeeper based clusters can be dropped, it is currently not expected to happen right after Strimzi 0.42 and this proposal does not establish any such plan.

> Moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ serves mainly the following purpose:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ serves mainly the following objectives:
```

> * Indicate the progress in Kraft implementation and improved production-readiness.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Signify the progress of the KRaft implementation and improvements in production-readiness.
```

> * Make it easier to run KRaft clusters without the need to enable any feature gate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Simplify running KRaft clusters by eliminating the need to enable any feature gate.
```

## Proposed changes

Apart from the change to the feature gate status itself, this proposal also includes several other changes.

### CRD changes

KRaft is usable only with the use of `KafkaNodePool` custom resources that configure the number of replicas and storage configuration.
As part of promoting the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ stage, we will make the following fields in the `Kafka` custom resource optional instead of required:
* `.spec.kafka.replicas`
* `.spec.kafka.storage`

In addition, the KRaft clusters do not need the ZooKeeper configuration.
So the `.spec.zookeeper` section will be made optional as well.

> For ZooKeeper clusters, the validation of these fields will be done inside the Strimzi operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For ZooKeeper-based Kafka clusters, the validation of these fields will be done inside the Strimzi operator.
```

> Additionally, CEL validation rules will be considered as they might allow us to do additional validation on the Kubernetes level.

Reviewer 3: Should we say a bit more about how the validation might be broken down by operator and Kubernetes level?

For Kafka clusters using the node pools, a warning will be raised by the operator when the ignored `.spec.kafka.replicas` and `.spec.kafka.storage` fields are used.

> For KRaft based clusters, a warning will be raised when `.spec.zookeeper` section is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For KRaft-based clusters, a warning will be raised when `.spec.zookeeper` section is used.
```

### Safety check for existing clusters

For existing clusters, a safety check will be implemented to prevent users from switching existing ZooKeeper-based clusters to Kraft-based cluster (or vice-versa) by mistake.

> This check will used the `.status.kafkaMetadataState` field in the `Kafka` custom resource to prevent any undesired switching between ZooKeeper-based and Kraft-based clusters (that has to be done via the migration process).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This check will use the `.status.kafkaMetadataState` field in the `Kafka` custom resource to prevent any unintentional switching between ZooKeeper-based and Kraft-based clusters. 
Switching cluster management modes must be performed through a migration process.
```

Moving the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ or _GA_ serves mainly the following objectives:
* Signify the progress of the KRaft implementation and improvements in production-readiness.
* Simplify running KRaft clusters by eliminating the need to enable any feature gate.

## Proposed changes

Apart from the change to the feature gate status itself, this proposal also includes several other changes.

### CRD changes

KRaft is usable only with the use of `KafkaNodePool` custom resources that configure the number of replicas and storage configuration.
As part of promoting the `UseKRaft` feature gate to _beta_ stage, we will make the following fields in the `Kafka` custom resource optional instead of required:
* `.spec.kafka.replicas`
* `.spec.kafka.storage`

In addition, the KRaft clusters do not need the ZooKeeper configuration.
So the `.spec.zookeeper` section will be made optional as well.

For ZooKeeper-based Kafka clusters, the validation of these fields will be done inside the Strimzi operator.

> Additionally, CEL validation rules will be considered as they might allow us to do additional validation on the Kubernetes level.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Additionally, [CEL validation rules](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/cel/) will be considered as they might allow us to do additional validation on the Kubernetes level.
```
